# nix-docker-base: Nix Docker base images for fast and minimal builds

This project automatically generates Docker images for nixpkgs channels. The images come with a prefetched nixpkgs, corresponding to the image tag, which is the nixpkgs commit hash. All basic Nix utilities are preinstalled, including [Cachix](https://cachix.org/). Also included is the `export-profile` script, allowing super minimal images via [multi-stage builds](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/multistage-build/).


See the [Usage](#usage) section for how to use it in your project.

## Features

### Prefetched nixpkgs tarballs

All images come prefetched with the [nixpkgs](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs) version corresponding to the image tag. So the image `niteo/nixpkgs-nixos-20.03:14006b724f3d1f25ecf38238ee723d38b0c2f4ce` contains a prefetched tarball of [14006b724f3d](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/14006b724f3d1f25ecf38238ee723d38b0c2f4ce). This allows Nix builds that pin nixpkgs to that version to start quickly, without having to first fetch and unpack a tarball.

### Preinstalled dependencies

All images come preinstalled with a basic set of dependencies needed for working with Nix. This currently includes [Cachix](https://cachix.org/) and all dependencies of Nix, but may be expanded in the future as the need arises. Since the intent is to use these images as the first stage in a multi-stage build, they won't influence the final image size, allowing the addition of more tools without a significant cost.

These dependencies notably come from the very nixpkgs version that is prefetched. If you need these tools or their dependencies in a Nix build, this saves you the cost of having to download them.

### Automatic channel updates

Every hour, [a GitHub Action](https://github.com/niteoweb/nix-docker-base/actions) runs to detect any nixpkgs channel updates, in which case a new Docker image is built and pushed to DockerHub with the corresponding tag.

Additionally, if this repository changes how images are built, the image tags corresponding to the latest channel versions are updated to incorporate these changes. This is the only way in which tagged images are updated, meaning once a nixpkgs channel commit is outdated, its image won't get updated anymore. So if this repository receives an update, you need to update nixpkgs to the latest version of the channel.

### Minimal multi-stage builds

All images contain the `export-profile` utility, which allows easy creation of a final stage in Docker [multi-stage builds](https://docs.docker.com/develop/develop-images/multistage-build/). The resulting image then contains only exactly the dependencies needed to run the programs you specify, nothing else.

## Usage

### Pinning nixpkgs

To use this for your project, you should ensure that the prefetched nixpkgs tarball can be used, such that builds can start as fast as possible. This requires that you [pin nixpkgs](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/FAQ/Pinning_Nixpkgs) to the nixpkgs commit of the channel that you wish to use. Specifically, the Nix expression that evaluates to the prefetched version is
```nix
fetchTarball {
  name = "nixpkgs-src";
  url = "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/<commit>.tar.gz";
  sha256 = "<sha256>";
}
```

Note that choosing the name as `nixpkgs-src` is very important, because Nix can only reuse a prefetched version if the name matches.

Only Nix channels specified in channel matrix in the [push workflow](https://github.com/niteoweb/nix-docker-base/blob/master/.github/workflows/push.yml) are available, but new ones may be added over time.

#### Using [Niv](https://github.com/nmattia/niv)

If you use Niv to manage your nixpkgs source, you need to ensure the following:
- The `nix/sources.nix` file was generated by a Niv version after [this change](https://github.com/nmattia/niv/pull/217)
- The nixpkgs Niv package is named `nixpkgs`. These two points are necessary for Niv to name the tarball `nixpkgs-src`
- The branch of the nixpkgs Niv package points to the nixpkgs channel you wish to use. This ensures that you don't update to unavailable commits

For a new project wanting to use the `nixos-20.03` channel, this can be done with:
```
niv init
niv modify nixpkgs -b nixos-20.03
niv update nixpkgs
```

For regenerating the `nix/sources.nix` in an existing project, you can run
```
rm nix/sources.nix
niv init
```

Finally, use the following command to check the tarballs name. It needs to end with `nixpkgs-src` for the prefetched nixpkgs to apply:
```
nix-instantiate --eval -E '(import nix/sources.nix).nixpkgs.outPath
=> "/nix/store/r07cldfsnr8kvkr1kpsc6jf6bibfc1mg-nixpkgs-src"
```

If it ends with `-source`, make sure to use a more recent Niv version.

### Nix expression

To use this project, you need a Nix expression in your project that ideally exposes a single derivation as an attribute for installation. A convenient helper for this is `pkgs.buildEnv`, which allows you to build a derivation that combines multiple other derivations into one. Here is an example `default.nix`, showing how `pkgs.buildEnv` can be used to create an environment with both `pkgs.curl` and `pkgs.cacert` in it:
```nix
let

  # Without niv
  pkgs = fetchTarball {
    name = "nixpkgs-src";
    url = "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/<commit>.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "<sha256>";
  };

  # With niv
  pkgs = (import nix/sources.nix).nixpkgs;

in {
  myEnv = pkgs.buildEnv {
    name = "env";
    paths = with pkgs; [
      curl
      cacert
    ];
  };
}
```

### Dockerfile

The base images are made available under [Niteo on DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/u/niteo) as `niteo/nixpkgs-<channel>:<commit>`. With the Dockerfile being in the same directory as the projects `default.nix` file, you can install any exposed attribute of that file with the following basic Dockerfile structure
```Dockerfile
FROM niteo/nixpkgs-<channel>:<commit> AS build
# Import the project source
COPY . src
RUN \
  # Install the program to propagate to the final image
  nix-env -f src -iA myEnv \
  # Exports a root directory structure containing all dependencies
  # installed with nix-env under /run/profile
  && export-profile /dist

# Second Docker stage, we start with a completely empty image
FROM scratch
# Copy the /dist root folder from the previous stage into this one
COPY --from=build /dist /
# Set PATH so Nix binaries can be found
ENV PATH=/run/profile/bin
```

#### What `export-profile` does

The main idea of `export-profile <root>` is to export the default `nix-env` profile with all its dependencies into `<root>`, such that the next build stage only needs to initialize its root directory with `<root>` from the previous stage. In more details, the script currently does:
- Symlink to the default `nix-env` profile from `<root>/run/profile`
- If the profile contains an `etc` directory, it symlinks to it from `<root>/etc`. This behavior mirrors NixOS, and allows for files like `/etc/bashrc` to take effect
- If the profile contains a `bin/env` (usually from `pkgs.coreutils`) or `bin/sh` (usually from `pkgs.bashInteractive`), it symlinks to those from `<root>/usr/bin/env` and `<root>/bin/sh` respectively. These are standard POSIX executable paths.
- All Nix store paths the profile depends on are copied to `<root>/nix/store`. This ensures that any previously established symlinks actually work.

#### SSL root certificates

If you require binaries like `curl` in the final image, you need to make sure that they can find SSL root certificates. To do this:
- Install `pkgs.cacert` in the `build` stage, either by adding it to the environment of the attribute you install, or with an additional nix-env command like
  ```
    nix-env -f '<nixpkgs>' -iA cacert
  ```
- Set the `NIX_SSL_CERT_FILE` environment variable as follows in the final stage
  ```Dockerfile
  ENV NIX_SSL_CERT_FILE=/etc/ssl/certs/ca-bundle.crt
  ```

#### Updating the Dockerfile

Since the nixpkgs commit is embedded into the Dockerfile, it should be kept in sync with the nixpkgs of your Nix files to ensure it being as efficient as possible. So if you update your nixpkgs source to a newer channel commit, be sure to update it in the Dockerfile as well.

If you manage your nixpkgs source with `niv`, this can be achieved automatically with the following commands:
```bash
niv update nixpkgs
channel=$(jq -r .nixpkgs.branch nix/sources.json)
rev=$(jq -r .nixpkgs.rev nix/sources.json)
sed -i "s#FROM.*AS build#FROM niteo/nixpkgs-$channel:$rev AS build#g" Dockerfile
```

### Connecting with SSH during CI

This image has built-in helpers for setting up a tmate connection to the image, useful for debugging when running in CI:

- `start-tmate [maxIdle]`: Starts a tmate session, which is persisted until `maxIdle` (by default 60) seconds pass without any connection. The command only exits once this has occured.
- `bash-tmate`: A drop-in replacement for bash that runs `start-tmate` when the bash command fails. Useful as a shell for CI scripts, allowing debugging in case of failures.

## Development and Contributing

This section is only intended for developers/contributors of this project. Feel free to contribute by opening a PR or open issues for enquiries.

### Adding new nixpkgs channels

A new channel can be added by editing the channel matrix in [push.yml](.github/workflows/push.yml) workflow to contain the one you want.

### Adding new tools to the base image

New tools for the base image can be added under `Extra tools` in [image.nix](./image.nix).

### Out-of-tree requirements for forks

- A [DockerHub](https://hub.docker.com/) account. Insert your username for `REGISTRY_USER` in the [push.yml](.github/workflows/push.yml) workflow, and set up the password as a `REGISTRY_PASSWORD` secret for the repository. This is of course needed to update images on DockerHub. Other container registries could work too, but the code needs to be adjusted for that.
- A [Cachix](https://cachix.org/) cache for speeding up CI. Set the Cachix name under the `cachix-action`s in the [push.yml](.github/workflows/push.yml) workflow, and add the signing key as the `CACHIX_SIGNING_KEY` secret in the repository.

## Related projects

- This project was originally forked from https://github.com/nix-community/docker-nixpkgs, but almost no code remains unchanged.
- The official Nix docker images at https://github.com/nixos/docker.
- [Nixery](https://nixery.dev/) is a pretty cool service that builds docker images from nixpkgs attributes on the fly.
